the investigation of the assassination
of President John F Kennedy performance
of the Intelligence Agency's book 5
final report of the Select Committee to
study governmental operations with
respect to intelligence activities
United States Senate
April 23rd 1976 Appendix A the FBI and
the Oswald security case a Oswald's
defection on October 31st 1959 after
learning that Lee Harvey Oswald had
defected to the Soviet Union and
informed officials at the American
Embassy in Moscow that he intended to
provide radar secrets to the Soviet
Union the FBI opened a security case
with Oswald as the subject as part of
the investigation the bureau meeting
queries of the Navy and discovered that
Oswald did not have knowledge of
strategic information that would benefit
the Soviets the FBI concluded that a
stop should be placed against Oswald's
fingerprints to prevent him from
obtaining a passport and entering the
United States under any name about six
months later the bureau interviewed
Oswald's mother who believed that he had
taken his birth certificate with him to
the Soviet Union in a memorandum
subsequently sent to the State
Department the FBI raised the
possibility that an imposter might
attempt to return to the United States
using Oswald's identity B Oswald's
return to the United States despite this
concern that an impostor might attempt
to enter the United States using
Oswald's identity the FBI did not
interview Oswald until almost three
weeks after his return On June 13 1962
footnote
Oswald was interviewed at the dock by an
Immigration and Naturalization Service
inspector on his return to the United
States and footnote there is no
indication that any of the FBI agents
assigned to the Oswald case were ever
warned that an impostor might attempt to
assume Oswald's identity in particular
Special Agent James hasti the FBI agent
responsible for the Oswald case at the
Dallas field office testified that he
had neither seen a copy of the June 3rd
1960 memorandum nor attempted to
determine whether someone had assumed
Oswald's identity footnote the committee
has found no evidence that an imposter
entered the United States in Oswald
stead and footnote On June 26th 1962
special agents John W Fane and B Tom
Carter interviewed Oswald in Fort Worth
Texas
according to sa phanes report Oswald was
cold arrogant and difficult to interview
Oswald denied that he told State
Department officials at the American
Embassy in Moscow that he was going to
one renounce his American citizenship to
applied for Soviet citizenship and three
reveal radar secrets to the Soviets
when fain asked Oswald to take a
polygraph test
Oswald refused to even be polygraphed on
whether he had dealings with Soviet
intelligence footnote the Warren
Commission apparently was not provided
with the administrative cover pages of
SA fans report which discussed Oswald's
refusal to be polygraphed nor did fain
report Oswald's refusal to be
polygraphed when he testified before the
Warren Commission on May 6th
1964 despite detailed questioning by
commission members Ford and Dulles as to
the discrepancies in Oswald's statements
and feigns reaction to them and footnote
Oswald also denied he had traveled to
the Soviet Union because quote of a lack
of sympathy for the institutions of the
United States end quote
a second interview on August 16th 1962
yielded similar denials
despite Oswald's attitude and
demonstratable lies the bureau closed
the Oswald's security case on August
20th 1962 it was not to be reopened
until March 26 1963 the only additional
action taken by the bureau before March
26th 1963 consisted of reviews of the
oswald file at the Department of State
inquiries of to low-level Dallas
Communist Party informants as to whether
they knew of Oswald with negative
responses and interviews with three of
Oswald's relatives
although wide-ranging interviews for a
basic investigative technique commonly
used by the bureau to develop background
information on subjects of security
investigations no neighborhood or
employment sources were checked in
Oswald's case nor was his wife
interviewed footnote assistant director
Gail commented upon this failure in his
memorandum of December 10th 1963 where
he wrote quote no neighborhood or
employment sources developed wife not
interviewed no meal covers or other
techniques were used to determine whom
Oswald in contact with or whether he had
an intelligence assignment
inspector feels this limited
investigation inadequate Dallas agent
possible for delinquencies now retired
and no explanations obtained from him
and quote the FBI did not interview
Marina Oswald prior to the assassination
although Marina Oswald was considered in
June 1962 for a bureau program which
monitored the activities of Soviet
immigrants and rhe Patriots to detect
possible foreign intelligence ties the
Dallas field office supervisor postponed
consideration of her for the program on
July 25th 1962 noting that quote her
activities could be sufficiently
monitored in connection with the
security case on Lee Harvey Oswald and
quote Hoover as noted above the FBI
security case on Lee Harvey Oswald was
closed less than a month later with
respect to Oswald x' marriage to marina
and her return to the United States the
Warren Commission stated as Wald's
marriage to Marina prusik OVA on April
30th 1961 is itself a fact meriting
consideration before iner living in
Russia cannot marry without the
permission of the Soviet government it
seems unlikely that the Soviet
authorities would have permitted Oswald
to marry and to take his wife with him
to the United States if they were
contemplating using him alone as an
agent the fact that he had a Russian
wife would be likely in their view to
increase any surveillance under which he
would be kept by American security
agencies would make him even more
conspicuous to his neighbors as an
ex-russian and would decrease his
mobility a wife's presence in the United
States would also constitute a
continuing risk of disclosure on the
other hand marina Oswald's lack of
English training and her complete
ignorance
of the United States and its customs
would scarcely recommend her to the
Soviet authorities as one member of an
agent team to be sent to the United
States on a difficult and dangerous
foreign enterprise
in contrast a retired Bureau Soviet
section supervisor told the committee
that of greatest concern to him in the
Oswald case was the fact that the
Soviets had allowed marina to return to
the United States with Oswald he felt
that if they desired to quote tap Oswald
on the shoulder and make use of him at
some future date marinas presence would
give them a great deal of leverage and
quote the supervisor explained quote the
Russians might try to exert leverage
possibly through her relatives or
threats to her relatives in Russia and
that sort of thing however it should be
emphasized that the supervisor testified
that he is not aware of any evidence
which establishes that the Soviets in
fact used or attempted to contact Oswald
see the continued investigation Dallas
on September 28th 1962 the New York
field office learned that Oswald
subscribed to the worker which the
bureau characterized as quote an East
Coast
tanja NIST newspaper and quote and
subsequently informed the Dallas field
office from the FBI's perspective
Oswald's subscription to this newspaper
contradicted his interview statements
that he was quote disenchanted with the
Soviet Union
end quote Oswald's subscription was
noted in his field office security file
but FBI headquarters was not informed of
the subscription until September 10th
1963 and then only after
had requested information on Oswald from
the Dallas office assistant director
Gale critically commented on this aspect
of the bureau's handling of the Oswald
case quote in light of Oswald's
defection the case should have been
reopened at the first indication of
Communists sympathy or activity footnote
director Hoover noted on November 29th
1963 that quote in Oswald's case there
was no indication of repentance but only
one of openly avowed hostility and
contacts with subversive elements end
quote
none of the bureau's internal criticism
of its own handling of the Oswald
security case or even the fact that
there was such criticism was ever made
known to the Warren Commission end quote
in October 1962 as a host E was assigned
the Marina Oswald security case which
was then in a pending inactive status
the file was reviewed by Haas T in March
1963 when he also located Marina Oswald
but he did not interview her because of
her alleged marital difficulties hasti
reviewed the Dallas security file on
Oswald and on the basis of Oswald's
subscription to the worker requested
approval to reopen the case on March
26th 1963 pasti received approval hasti
stated that he did not interview Marina
Oswald because he had developed
information that Oswald had been
drinking to excess and beating his wife
and the relevant FBI manual provision
required that he allow a cooling-off
period footnote the committee has
verified that since such a manual
provision
was in effect it appears that hostage
decision to allow a cooling-off period
prior to interviewing marina was
entirely in accordance with FBI
regulations
neither the documents nor the testimony
of knowledgeable FBI officers provides
any explanation for either Hoover or
Gail's critical comments and footnote
FBI director Hoover later commented on
the December 10th 1963 Gale memorandum
that quote this was certainly an asinine
excuse and quote end quote I just don't
understand such solicitude and quote
inspector Gale had written that quote
this entire facet of the investigation
was mishandled mrs. Oswald definitely
should have been interviewed and the
best time to get information from her
would be after she was beaten up by her
husband end quote
the director added the following
notation next to Gail's conclusion quote
this certainly makes sense
end quote on April 21st 1963 the New
York field office learned that Oswald
had written a letter to the fair play
for Cuba committee this was the first
indication in Bureau files that Oswald
had a relationship with this pro-castro
organization
Oswald's letter stated that he had
passed out FPC C literature in Dallas
with a placard around his neck reading
quote hands off Cuba Viva Fidel end
quote this information was not reported
to Dallas until June 27th 1963 and not
reported to headquarters until September
10th 1963 once again
Oswald's activities contradicted his
interview
statements on May 27th 1963 hasti
returned to the Oswald's Neeley Street
residents to interview marina and was
informed that the Oswald's had moved
from the Dallas area without leaving a
forwarding address in response to an
essay see memorandum issued by the
Dallas office seeking information on the
Oswald's whereabouts the New Orleans
office informed Dallas on July 17th 1963
that the Oswald's were living in that
city the bureau apparently learned of
Oswald's presence in New Orleans from a
letter he had written to the worker On
June 26 1963 Oswald claimed in the
letter to be a longtime subscriber and
stated that he was forming an F PCC
chapter in New Orleans he enclosed
honorary membership cards for quote
those fighters for peace end quote
mr. Gus hall secretary-general of the
Communist Party USA and Benjamin Davis
National Secretary of the Communist
Party USA on September 10th 1963 New
Orleans became the office for the Oswald
case d the continued investigation New
Orleans Oswald was arrested on August
9th 1963 in New Orleans in connection
with his FPC C activities and charged
with quote disturbing the peace by
creating a scene and quote footnote
there is no indication in FBI documents
or the Warren Commission's record that
Oswald was in New Orleans on any
occasion between October 1959 and April
24th 1963 however an Immigration and
Naturalization Service
inspector testified before the committee
that he is absolutely certain that he
interviewed Lee Harvey Oswald in a New
Orleans jail cell sometime shortly
before his April 1st 1963 transfer out
of New Orleans
although the inspector is not now
certain whether Oswald was using that
particular name at that time he is
certain that Oswald was quote claiming
to be a Cuban alien and quote and that
he quote interviewed Oswald to verify or
disprove this status and quote the
inspector neither recalls what Oswald
said nor what language or languages he
conversed in he does not recall anything
unusual about Oswald's dress or demeanor
and believes that he quickly ascertained
that Oswald was not a Cuban alien at
which time he would have left Oswald in
his jail cell On January 6th 1976 the
committee staff telephonically contacted
the New Orleans Police Department and
requested that they review their Oswald
arrest records to see if he had been
arrested other than on August 9th 1963
On January 7th the staff was informed
that there was no record of another
Oswald arrest and that the New Orleans
Police Department in fact had no
information on Oswald prior to August
9th 1963 and footnote on the morning of
August 10th
Oswald asked to see a bureau agent and
he was interviewed at length by si John
L Quigley Oswald also repeatedly lied to
this FBI agent for example he told
quickly that he had met and married his
wife in Fort Worth Texas the New Orleans
office learned on August
22nd 1963 that Oswald participated in a
radio program where he stated that he
was a Marxist and that quote Cuba is the
only real revolutionary country in the
world today end quote
on August 23rd 1963 the New Orleans
office was instructed by headquarters to
quote submit results of their Oswald
investigation to the bureau and quote on
September 24th 1963 the New Orleans
office advised the bureau that the
investigation was continuing and that a
report detailing the investigative
findings would be furnished an
investigative report was subsequently
sent to the bureau on October 31st 1963
but it did not contain any significant
information that was not already in
Oswald's headquarters file the report
reveals that only two informants in the
New Orleans area were asked about Oswald
and that neither had heard of him on
October 2nd 1963 agents of the New
Orleans office attempted to ascertain
Oswald's residence and place of
employment they learned that the
Oswald's had left New Orleans leads to
locate Oswald were sent to Dallas Fort
Worth and Malvern Arkansas the evidence
indicates that Lee Harvey Oswald was in
Mexico City from September 27th 1963
through October 2nd 1963 on October 10th
1963 Bureau headquarters was provided
with a copy of a CIA cable which stated
that quote Lee Henry Oswald
and quote had been in contact with the
Soviet embassy in Mexico City on
September 28 1963
footnote all the information that the
FBI
prior to November 22nd 1963 on Oswald's
activities in Mexico City came from the
CIA on October 3rd 1963 the CIA Mexico
station reported to headquarters that
Oswald had been in contact with the
Soviet embassy on October 10th 1963 CIA
headquarters passed this information
with some background material to the
Navy the State Department and the FBI
the Mexico station made a similar
distribution to FBI and state Department
officials in Mexico since Oswald was an
American citizen and since FBI was the
responsible agency disseminating this
information and did CIA's responsibility
in this matter and quote it was not
until October 22nd 1963 that information
pertaining to Oswald's Mexico City trip
was provided to the New Orleans office
si hasti in Dallas had by chance
ascertained similar information from the
local I and NS office and coincidentally
his report detailing this information
was received in New Orleans on October
22nd 1963 thus despite the fact that
both the Dallas and New Orleans field
offices were aware that Oswald had been
in contact with the Soviet embassy in
Mexico City there is no evidence that
either of these field offices
intensified their efforts to locate and
interview Oswald most surprising however
is that the quote Soviet experts and
quote at FBI headquarters did not
intensify their efforts in the Oswald
case after being informed that Oswald
had met with vice consul Costa qov at
the Soviet embassy in Mexico City not
only were these experts
familiar with Soviet activities in
general but they knew that Costa cough
was a member of the KGB further the
bureau's Soviet experts had reason to
believe he was an agent within the KGB's
Department which carries out
assassination and sabotage
they were also aware that American
citizen contacts with the Soviet embassy
in Mexico City were extremely rare
ironically the teletype which informed
the bureau of Oswald's Mexico City
activities was sitting on a pile of
documents on a headquarters supervisors
desk awaiting initial action on November
22nd 1963 that portion of the Gail
memorandum which discusses Oswald's
Mexico City trip reads as follows quote
the SOG seat of government supervisor
failed to take any action on the
teletypes stating it did not appear to
him any action was warranted
inspector Gale feels the field should
have been instructed to intensify
investigation and Oswald placed on
security index n quote II continued
investigation Dallas on October 26 1963
the New Orleans field office advised the
Dallas office that the Oswald's had left
a forwarding address in Irving Texas
Dallas was asked to verify the new
residence and on October 30th 1963 sa
hasti reported that although Oswald's
family was living with the Payne family
in Irving Oswald was not living there on
November 1st 1963 hasti went to the pain
residence to quote find out where Oswald
was residing and quote footnote it
should be noted that under the relevant
FBI manual provisions
then in effect any contact such as
Oswalt's with the Soviet embassy in
Mexico City required that immediate
investigative action at the appropriate
field office be undertaken however it
should be further noted that other
provisions precluded the field offices
interviewing Oswald without the express
written approval or a direction of
headquarters and footnote rue Spain
informed hasti that she did not know
where Oswald lived however she did state
that Oswald was employed at the Texas
Book Depository toward the end of the
interview Marina Oswald came into the
room
according to hasti she expressed fear of
the bureau and their brief conversation
with Ruth Payne translating was an
attempt to reassure her after the
assassination the Dallas office
explained to FBI headquarters that the
investigation had been delayed to quote
be sure that it was in possession of all
information from New Orleans
end quote inspector Gale commented on
this explanation in his December 10th
1963 memorandum quote inspector
definitely does not agree New Orleans
submitted 16 page report 1030 163 and
only leads outstanding in New Orleans
were to ascertain Oswald's whereabouts
no indication New Orleans had any
further data even if New Orleans had not
reported all information in their
possession Dallas should have
intensified investigation in light of
Oswald's contact with Soviet embassy in
Mexico City and not held investigation
in abeyance and quote finally it should
be noted that facts publicly disclosed
by the bureau in October 1975 establish
that some two
weeks prior to the assassination Lee
Harvey Oswald visited the FBI's Dallas
field office and left a note for Special
Agent James P hasti jr. and that the
note was subsequently destroyed the
circumstances surrounding the receipt
and destruction of the Oswald note are
discussed in Appendix B